Phase 1 Project Selection Status Report

Name: Cheryl Hung                                                           

College: King's                                              

User Identifier: cjh84

Director of Studies: Dr Simone Teufel                                           

Please complete 1, 2 and 3 below.

1. Please write 100 words on your current project ideas.
                                                                 
This project involves using the Vicon motion capture system, together with machine learning techniques, to implement gesture recognition. Initially, I intend to use Hidden Markov Models and neural networks, comparing their success rate in my evaluation.

A set of 5-10 gestures will drive a robot, including accelerate, decelerate and turn; currently an OLPC XO laptop mounted onto an iRobot Create. Extensions include:

3D gestures, allowing people to move around while performing a gesture
Multiperson gesture recognition, each user controlling one robot
Using the Create touch sensors to detect collisions for a game
Using the OLPC webcam to stream real time video from the robot's POV.                                                              

2. Please list names of potential project supervisors.
                                                                 
Cecily Morrison, cpm38
Laurel Riek, lr314

3. Is there any chance that your project will involve any
computing resources other than the Computing Service's PWF and
software that is already installed there, for example: your own
machine, machines in College, special peripherals, imported
software packages, special hardware, network access, substantial
extra disc space on the PWF.

If so indicate below what, and what it is needed for.

Vicon motion capture system, for gesture recognition
Two iRobot Create and OLPC XO laptops; approximately £400 total. I have secured funding from the women@CL Outreach program for the inital robot, and have applied to my college for the second. 
If the robots are unavailable, my backup plan is to drive a virtual robot using the same techniques.
